# Homebrew_CPU

## On the Shoulders of Giants
This project was initially inspired by Ben Eater's excellent video series on building a simple-as-possible (SAP-1) breadboard-based computer (https://eater.net/8bit and https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLowKtXNTBypGqImE405J2565dvjafglHU). If you are unfamiliar with Ben Eater and have even a modicum of interest in the subject of building a homebrew CPU, you really should consider checking out his content on YouTube. He's a very skilled educator, having previously worked for Khan Academy. He has a teaching style that is presented from a the perspective of someone uninitiated in the subject, and he "discovers" each small detail until he accomplishes the stated goal of each video. His videos are presented in a trial-and-error style approach, but - of course, he knows where he's going with it and doesn't waste your time. They are very rewarding videos to watch and make you feel incredibly smart.

Having learned programming at fourteen years old, I had always wondered how typing a sequence of keys on a keyboard (vis-a-vis, programming) could somehow turn into electrical signals that can be interpreted by a computer. Ben's videos were excellent for getting a better handle on what was really going on under the hood, but his design is purposely as simple as possible. And to be honest, a 4-bit computer (he calls it 8-bit but it can only actually do computations on 4 bits at a time) is not much computing power. When I initially envisioned this project, I was aiming for something that would allow me to program simple games in an assembly langauge of my devising. Something like the original Nintendo Entertainment System (NES), preferably. For this goal, Ben's 4-bit computer was not enough. 

That's when I started learning about the processor that the NES itself was based on - the 6502 (http://6502.org/). This chip has been studied extensively by the homebrew community, and there are some pretty impressive designs out there. But this still wasn't quite what I wanted - I wanted a chip of similar computing power to the 6502 but I wanted something of my own design. Granted, there are very unique designs on http://6502.org/ that a functionally similar or identical to the 6502, but that's still not what I wanted. I wanted to do everything from scratch. I wanted to design a block diagram of my own devising and follow through with building all the components from scratch.

That's when I came across Warren Toomey's fantastically simple CSCvon8 computer (https://github.com/DoctorWkt/CSCvon8). The first iteration of this computer was very much a keep-it-simple-stupid (KISS) implementation of Ben Eater's design that manages to build a pretty powerful little computer with only 17 integrated circuit chips. Going forward, I would use the CSCvon8 as inspiration for designing my own build.

## Unique Features of this Project
Even with all of the homebrew CPU builds I've done, I have yet to come across the sort of all-inclusive build I was aiming for in my design. My envisioning of this project was to build a CPU that I could boot up with a simple DOS-like operating system that would allow me to enter assembly code. Then, the code would be compiled and executed by the computer. To be clear, lots of builds out there have this capability, but they all seem to use the UART protocol. (If you're unfamiliar with UART, it's basically using a cable to connect the computer of interest to another, more powerful computer...then use that more powerful computer to get the keyboard input and generate output of the less powerful computer.) Instead, my idea was to have a self-contained build, including ONLY this CPU, a connected keyboard, controller, video card, sound card, and monitor...no additional computers needed. The idea is that I could sit down at this CPU, program it via the keyboard, then run games on it. I have yet to come across a build that does this. 

Furthermore, the CSCvon8 design is, like Ben Eater's design, purposely over-simplified. While it achieves a sufficient level of computing power with a minimal number of chips (primarily because it uses a ROM chip as the ALU), it doesn't achieve the level of functionality that I would like for my build. For example, I am hoping to include the following additional features in this processor design:
  - Interrupts for keyboard and controller input
  - 3 to 4 General Purpose Registers in place of the CSCvon8's 2
  - A memory bridge that decouples the Memory and Data bus lines to avoid contention between instruction and data throughput
  - Memory bank switching, which allows the programmer to select which RAM slot to use and extends the overall addressing space of the processor
  - A stack pointer for pushing and popping variables into and out of memory
  - Additional 16-bit count registers that can be incremented and decremented for modifying address values, indepdendent of the program counter
  - An additional 16-bit register for holding return addresses, which will work in tandem with the stack pointer to allow nested subroutine calls
  - An operating system, built-in programming IDE with syntax highlighting, customizable assembler, and high-level (C-like) compiler

## My Hopes for this Project
Beyond the actual implementation of the build, I hope to create a self-contained repository of information for anyone interested in building something similar on their own. My goal is to take nothing for granted and to, probably, over-explain so that this content is useful to the widest audience possible. I want to do this primarily because while there are some very impressive builds out there, the level that they are presented at is really only useful for people with expert knowledge of the broad category of skills required to accomplish such builds...and I don't really think that's the best approach. I think that computers have become integral parts of modern day life, and for that reason I believe that everyone should understand what is really going on under the hood. Join me!
